# Efficacy of two long acting intramammary antimicrobials for curing subclinical mastitis due to non-aureus Staphylocci in dairy goats.

Authors: Michelle P. Buckley(a), Gustavo S. Silva(b), Roselle C. Busch(c), Orhan Sahin(d), Paul J. Plummer(a), Patrick J. Gorden(b)

(a) Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 50011 USA; michelle.buckley@ttu.edu
(b) Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 50011 USA; gustavos@iastate.edu; pgorden@iastate.edu
(c) Department of Population Health & Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA; rcbusch@ucdavis.edu
(d) Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 50011 USA; osahin@iastate.edu

**Corresponding author:** pgorden@iastate.edu

**Abstract**
Non-aureus Staphylococci are the most prevalent cause of subclinical mastitis in dairy goats. The goals of this study were to describe the prevalence of subclinical mastitis pathogens on commercial goat dairies in the United States and evaluate the efficacy of intramammary antimicrobials for curing subclinical mastitis caused by NAS . 

Does enrolled in this study were residents of one of three commercial dairies in either IA, WI, or CA. Enrollment criteria included no evidence of clinical mastitis, two functional udder halves, no antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory treatment within 30 days prior to dry-off, and an expected dry period between 30-90 days. All eligible does had aseptic milk samples collected for aerobic culture one week prior to scheduled dry-off. Pathogens were isolated and identified using standard laboratory techniques and confirmed using Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization-Time of Flight. Halves that cultured positive for NAS were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups: 500 mg CLOX  (Orbenin DC, Merck & Co., Rahway, NJ), 300 mg CEPH  (ToMORROW, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, Duluth, GA), or NT . If the contralateral half also cultured positive, it was assigned the same treatment group as the other half. Contralateral halves that cultured negative were enrolled as NC  and no therapy was administered. Each enrolled doe had post-kidding aseptic milk samples collected for aerobic culture within 7 days of parturition. Cured infection risk was used to evaluate efficacy of each treatment.

Data analysis was completed using publicly available statistical software. Of all halves sampled prior to dry-off, 38.6% had subclinical infection with NAS at dry-off. Across all farms 85.4% of CEPH treated halves experienced a cure while 81.4% of CLOX treated halves cured during the dry period and 54.1% of NT halves. Both antimicrobial treatments were significantly more effective for curing infections than non-treatment (P<0.001).

Given the high prevalence of subclinical mastitis due to NAS at dry-off and the improved cure rates with administration of a long-acting intramammary antimicrobials compared with non-treatment, selective dry therapy can be an effective management strategy for commercial goat dairies in the US.

**Keywords:** Dairy goat, cloxacillin, cephapirin, mastitis, milk quality

## Highlights
•	The prevalence of non-aureus Staphylococci shortly before dry-off in clinically normal goats on three US dairies was 38.6%.
•	Cephapirin benzathine and cloxacillin benzathine were both more effective at curing subclinical mastitis due to non-aureus Staphylococci than no treatment.
•	Re-infection rates were similar between both treatment groups and negative control.

**Statistical analysis**
This study was designed as a randomized clinical trial to determine the superiority of CEPH or CLOX over NT. This trial was selected over a non-inferiority design as there are no labeled products for IMM therapy for dairy goats and non-treatment allows for determination of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) of IMM pathogens in treated animals.

Sample size calculations were based on expected cure rate of does with eligible infections at DO. Based on the literature (McDougall et al., 2002, Koop et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2015) and input from our stakeholders, we conservatively estimated a 30% prevalence of does with a NAS IMI at dry-off and estimated that 60% of the treated does would experience a bacteriological cure from dry-off antimicrobial therapy, while 30% of the untreated does would eliminate IMM infections spontaneously over the dry period. Assuming a two-sided significance level of 95%, power of 80%, and cure risk of 2:1, a sample size of 50 does per treatment are needed. To account for loss to follow-up, contaminated milk samples, and for clustering of halves and does, sample size was inflated by 30%. This resulted in a target sample size of 65 does per treatment group. We aimed to enroll 195 does total from CA with an additional 195 from IA and WI combined.

**Data management**
Milk yield and SCS data were collected via monthly DHI testing. Disease and health event (clinical mastitis, culling, and death) events and dates were collected from the farms’ electronic records systems. All data, laboratory results, and health events were recorded manually and duplicated as digital spreadsheets (Microsoft Excel, Redmond, WA) which were stored in a cloud-based data sharing environment (Box, Redwood City, CA). A commercial statistical software (R Statistical Programing Environment, v.4.1.0, R Core Team (2024), Boston, MA) was utilized for data analysis using the packages lme4, nlme, car, emmeans, multcomp, logistf, stats, and survival. Continuous variables were evaluated visually for normality using quantile-quantile plots. The data sets and analyses can be downloaded at: Github. 

Dry period length outside the accepted window of 30-90 days or antibiotic treatment at any point between DO and PK sample collection led to retrospective exclusion from the study. Halves that were missed, were not collected within 7 days of kidding, or where both samples were contaminated were excluded from prevalence evaluations for affected time points as well as all risk evaluations. 

The final generalized linear mixed model for IMI at post-kidding included random effects for farm as well as individual does. Infection at dry-off was examined as a covariate but removed due to non-significance. Cure risk was not significantly different between farms and this factor was therefore removed from the final model as a random effect. For models evaluating risk of IMI post-kidding, there was significant variation between farms. Both farm and doe ID were included as random effects in the final generalized linear mixed model.

A repeated measures model was used to assess milk yield during the first 120 DIM across treatment groups with fixed effects of treatment, time, and the interaction between both included in the final model. To account for inconsistencies in DIM at the first test as well as the duration of time between tests for doe-level production metrics, four-time categories were utilized within the model as a fixed effect. These categories were 1-30 DIM, 31-60 DIM, 61-90 DIM, and 91-120 DIM. 

**Effect of treatment group on half-level microbial dynamics**
Dry-off and PK culture results were compared to determine infection dynamics during the dry period. A cured IMI (CIMI) was defined as a half with a confirmed infection on DO sample whose PK culture result was either ‘No Growth’ or a different pathogen from the DO culture. A new infection (NIMI) was defined as a half with no IMI on DO sampling which did have a pathogen present in the PK sample or a half with different pathogens present in DO and PK samples (Rowe et al., 2020).

A generalized linear mixed model (logistic regression) was used to build the final model to assess the differences between treatments for each explanatory variable (IMI at enrollment, IMI at 1-7 DIM, CIMI risk and NIMI risk) while controlling for other factors. Parity at dry-off, milk yield (kg) at the last DHIA test-day before enrollment, SCC at the last DHIA test-day before enrollment, and DIM at the PC sample were all examined as potential doe-level confounders in each model. Random intercepts for does and herds were included in each model to account for clustering of halves and does. For IMI at enrollment, a Firth's bias-Reduced penalized-likelihood logistic regression was used to address the lack of variability of the outcome across treatment groups.

Each multivariable model was originally created using all potential doe-level associated factors, then potential controlling variables which were highly correlated via a Pearson or Kendall’s tau correlation coefficient > 0.7, were removed based on biological plausibility for the model, and only 1 variable was used to assess confounding. Each confounder was evaluated independently within the model using a Wald test with P < 0.05 indicating significance. Interaction terms with Wald tests at P < 0.05 were retained in the final model followed by removal of each potential confounder from the model individually. Potential confounders were returned to the final model if their removal changed the effect estimate by more than 10%.

**Effect of treatment vs no treatment on half-level outcomes**
The purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy of either treatment to a lack of treatment and not to compare the two IMM antimicrobials to each other. Using doe and herd as random intercepts within a linear mixed model accounted for clustering of tests within does and does within herds. This model was then applied to a compound symmetry correlation structure. To assess the differences over time, days in milk was added into the model at 4 levels (level 1 = 1 to 30 DIM, 2 = 31 to 60 DIM, 3 = 61 to 90 DIM, 4 = 91 to 120 DIM). The final model included an interaction term between treatment and time. Assessment of doe-level confounders was performed as with half-level factors with differences between treatment groups assessed using least square means. 

Generalized linear mixed models were used to assess health events through 120 DIM. The same protocol was used to create these models as with half-level IMI dynamics and production metrics. Only the first case of clinical mastitis noted by farm personnel within the first 120 DIM was included in the model. In the final survival model, culling and death events were combined. In addition to the analysis described above, a survival analysis was created in separate models to assess the effect of treatment on the time to outcome (clinical mastitis, culling and death during the first 120 DIM). Exclusion criteria included death or culling before kidding; this data was left censored from this analysis. Clinical mastitis, culling or death, or when they reached 120 DIM qualified does for right-censoring. Associations between treatment groups, and hazard ratios (HR) were estimated using Cox proportional hazards regression within long-rank tested Kaplan-Meier survival curves while a robust sandwich estimator accounted for clustering of does within herds. Schoenfeld residuals were compared over time to assess proportional hazards assumptions for each covariate using the Schoenfeld test. The same confounders and strategies described previously were used to create the final Cox proportional hazards models for the effect of treatment group on doe-level outcomes.

